Build Cache miss links more to GE (#23257)
gradle/gradle: subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/build-cache/build_cache_debugging.adoc

The log shows e.g. which source files constitute the `stableSources` for the `compileJava` task.
To find the actual differences between two builds you need to resort to matching up and comparing those hashes yourself.

TIP: link:https://docs.gradle.com/enterprise/tutorials/task-inputs-comparison/[Gradle Enterprise] already takes care of this for you; it lets you quickly diagnose a cache miss with the Build Scan(TM) Comparison tool.

[[diagnosing_cache_miss]]
== Diagnosing the reasons for a cache miss

> You should be able to diagnose why the outputs of a certain task were not found in the build cache.

Reviewer: I think you can leave this sentence as is. It's assuming you are doing the manual process of comparing task input fingerprints.

> You should be able to diagnose why the outputs of a certain task were not found in the build cache.

Author: ```suggestion
Having the data from the last section at hand, you should be able to diagnose why the outputs of a certain task were not found in the build cache.
```

The log shows e.g. which source files constitute the `stableSources` for the `compileJava` task.
To find the actual differences between two builds you need to resort to matching up and comparing those hashes yourself.

TIP: link:https://docs.gradle.com/enterprise/tutorials/task-inputs-comparison/[Gradle Enterprise] already takes care of this for you; it lets you quickly diagnose a cache miss with the Build Scan(TM) Comparison tool.

[[diagnosing_cache_miss]]
== Diagnosing the reasons for a cache miss

You should be able to diagnose why the outputs of a certain task were not found in the build cache.
Since you were expecting more tasks to be cached, you should be able to pinpoint a build which would have produced the artifact under question.

Before diving into how to find out why one task has not been loaded from the cache we should first look into which task caused the cache misses.
There is a cascade effect which causes dependent tasks to be executed if one of the tasks earlier in the build is not loaded from the cache and has different outputs.
Therefore, you should locate the first cacheable task which was executed and continue investigating from there.

> This can be done from the timeline view in a build scan or from the task input comparison directly:

Reviewer: This should be:

```
This can be done from the timeline view in a Build Scan:
```

It is also possible that task output caching for a cacheable task was disabled.
When this happens the reason why caching was disabled for the task is reported on the info log level and in the build scan:

[.screenshot]
image::build-cache/caching-disabled.png[]

[[diagnosing_cache_miss]]
== Diagnosing the reasons for a cache miss

Having the data from the last section at hand, you should be able to diagnose why the outputs of a certain task were not found in the build cache.
Since you were expecting more tasks to be cached, you should be able to pinpoint a build which would have produced the artifact under question.

Before diving into how to find out why one task has not been loaded from the cache we should first look into which task caused the cache misses.
There is a cascade effect which causes dependent tasks to be executed if one of the tasks earlier in the build is not loaded from the cache and has different outputs.
Therefore, you should locate the first cacheable task which was executed and continue investigating from there.
This can be done from the timeline view in a build scan or from the task input comparison directly:

[.screenshot]

> image::build-cache/first-non-cached-task.png[]

Reviewer: > This can be done from the timeline view in a build scan

This is possible using scans.gradle.com.

> the task input comparison directly

This is not.

It is also possible that a file generated by a task changed, e.g. since it includes a timestamp.
As described in <<common_caching_problems.adoc#java_version_tracking,Java version tracking>>, the Java version can also influence the output of the Java compiler.
If you did not expect the file to be an input to the task, then it is possible that you should alter the configuration of the task to not include it.
For example, having your integration test configuration including all the unit test classes as a dependency has the effect that all integration tests
are re-executed when a unit test changes.
Another option is that the task tracks absolute paths instead of relative paths and the location of the project directory changed on disk.

== Example

We will walk you through the process of diagnosing a cache miss.
Let's say we have build `A` and build `B` and we expected all the test tasks for a sub-project `sub1` to be cached in build `B` since only a unit test for another sub-project `sub2` changed.
Instead, all the tests for the sub-project have been executed.
Since we have the cascading effect when we have cache misses, we need to find the task which caused the caching chain to fail.

> This can easily be done by filtering for all cacheable tasks which have been executed and then select the first one.

Reviewer: This is possible on scans.gradle.com. 👌

In our case, it turns out that the tests for the sub-project `internal-testing` were executed even though there was no code change to this project.

> We start the input property comparison in Gradle Enterprise and see that the property `classpath` changed. This means that some file on the runtime classpath actually did change.

Reviewer: > We start the input property comparison in Gradle Enterprise and see that the property `classpath` changed. This means that some file on the runtime classpath actually did change.

This should be removed. I'm not sure if it causes too much of a leap to the next line.

Looking deeper into this, we actually see that the inputs for the task `processResources` changed in that project, too.
Finally, we find this in our build file:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/buildCache/normalization/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=versionInfo]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/buildCache/normalization/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=versionInfo]"]
====

Since properties files stored by Java's `Properties.store` method contain a timestamp, this will cause a change to the runtime classpath every time the build runs.
In order to solve this problem see <<common_caching_problems.adoc#volatile_outputs,non-repeatable task outputs>> or use <<build_cache_concepts.adoc#normalization,input normalization>>.

[NOTE]
====
The compile classpath is not affected since compile avoidance ignores non-class files on the classpath.

> ====

Reviewer: I think all of this should remain. There is one usage of Gradle Enterprise that should be removed though.

Reviewer: Re-reading it, maybe not. Doing what this describes does heavily rely on features available only in Gradle Enterprise.

Reviewer: Let's leave it. I will try to make some suggestions to remove some of the Gradle Enterprise only features.

> link:https://docs.gradle.com/enterprise/tutorials/task-inputs-comparison/[Gradle Enterprise] already takes care of this for you; it lets you quickly diagnose a cache miss when comparing two build scans.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
link:https://docs.gradle.com/enterprise/tutorials/task-inputs-comparison/[Gradle Enterprise] already takes care of this for you; it lets you quickly diagnose a cache miss with its Build Scan Comparison feature.
```

Before diving into how to find out why one task has not been loaded from the cache we should first look into which task caused the cache misses.
There is a cascade effect which causes dependent tasks to be executed if one of the tasks earlier in the build is not loaded from the cache and has different outputs.
Therefore, you should locate the first cacheable task which was executed and continue investigating from there.

> This can be done from the timeline view in a Build Scan(TM) or from the task input comparison directly:

Reviewer: Task input comparison is a feature of Gradle Enterprise.

```suggestion
This can be done from the timeline view in a Build Scan(TM):
```
